[music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
[music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLotss podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway
>> and I'm Joe Weisenthal.
>> Joe Venezuela. [music]
>> Venezuela week.
>> So we've done the oil market. Yeah, we
got to do the debt market.
>> We got to do the debt market. I don't
know anything about this stuff, so
[snorts]
we got to do it.
>> One of the reasons that I really like
covering the debt market, bonds, is
because I think we're used to thinking
of bonds as contracts.
>> Yeah.
>> But I always like to think of them more
as stories.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> So, they're full of all these narratives
and embedded values and history. And
there's actually a great quote from
Margaret Atwood. She wrote this whole
book called Payback on Debt. and she
describes it as a story or a memory of
who owes what and why.
>> Yeah.
>> And of course, if you're talking about a
story or a narrative, those can change
over time, right?
>> Absolutely. I mean, so one thing I know
is that just since Saturday morning and
the early trading, I think the existing
defaulted Venezuelan debt that's out
there, I think it's rallied. I think
it's gone up. Oh, yeah. But I don't
understand like, you know, you're trying
to get the economy going again. You're
going to make everybody pay for this
money that was borrowed by someone who
the international community regards to
be legitimate as a dictator. If
anything, shouldn't the creditors that
facilitated his ongoing rise, shouldn't
they have to pay? Not only should they
not get paid back, shouldn't they pay
the people of Venezuela extra for having
subsidized someone that is widely
regarded to be a criminal? We're calling
this guy a narot terrorist and yet so
it's like shouldn't we punish the people
who lent to him?
>> Maybe you should be on the restructuring
team joke. No, but it's true. So this is
the debate. So you're right. Bonds have
rallied. So there's Venezuelan sovereign
debt. There's also debt issued by PVESA
and those have gone from like 5 cents on
the dollar a few years ago to more than
30 cents. So people are already making
money. And the bet here is that there is
going to be some sort of restructuring
and they're going to get more money. And
of course, the creditors, the investors
always want more. Meanwhile, there's a
strong argument that the Venezuelan
people should have their debt load
alleviated in some way.
>> Yeah, I'm in favor of a negative
recovery.
>> Okay. [laughter]
All right. Well, we really do have the
perfect guest to talk about all of this.
Uh someone we've had on the show before,
but it's been a while. We're going to be
speaking with Lee Bukhite. He is a
retired lawyer now. He's had a 40-year
legal career, worked on more than two
dozen sovereign debt restructurings,
including Greece and Iraq, and that's
going to be relevant to this
conversation. So, really the perfect
guest. Lee, welcome back to the show.
>> Thank you, Tracy and Joe. Good to be
back. Maybe just to begin, can you sort
of set out the scene of the creditors
and the debt that Venezuela actually
owes? Who owns those bonds and how much
debt are we talking about?
>> In total, probably now the Venezuelan
debt is someplace between 150 and 170
billion. Not all of that is bombs. And
that's one of the issues that we should
discuss. The bonds that we're talking
about are principally Republic of
Venezuela and Pedabvesa bonds roughly
split 5050.
They were issued during the Chavez and
early Maduro periods.
They went into default all of them in
the fall of 2017. You remember Mr. Trump
in his first term imposed sanctions on
Venezuela in August of 2017. The
response was to have the bonds go into
default and they have remained in
default since then. One of the
difficulties that Venezuela will face in
restructuring its what I call legacy
debt stock is that there are all kinds
of other liabilities that are not in the
form of bonds. So there are unpaid trade
creditors, there are holders of
arbitration awards, chunky arbitration
awards, there are people with blocked
deposits in Venezuela. And so the
restructuring when and if it comes will
not be the simple homogeneous kind of
restructuring that we're used to where
there are bonds or in the old days bank
loans. This is going to be a much more
diverse creditor group.
>> Is there a formal hierarchy that exists
either in written law or in norms that
sort of establish who comes first when
we have these multitude of instruments
or is it the type of thing where the
conditions of each country depending on
what they are etc. And maybe the
conventions, not necessarily written
down the same way in formal law, will
help sort of determine that waterfall. I
suppose
>> nothing in law, but in convention, debts
extended by the multilateral
institutions, the IMF, the World Bank,
the Interamerican Development Bank, that
sort of thing are treated as preferred
creditors. So they will not be
restructured in a formal sense.
Once you come down from that level then
you have government debts. So you know
debts extended by France, Germany, the
United States typically for export
encouragement
and then commercial debts and that can
be bonds, bank loans and these various
other sorts of things they all rank
equally.
>> Okay. Now, the government creditors
would like you to believe that they have
some kind of intermediate seniority, but
in fact, they don't.
>> So, Joe touched on this in his emotional
intro, but
>> I wasn't expecting to get so agitated,
but it's like, we're calling this guy a
narot terrorist and we they have to pay
back his debts. It's ridiculous.
>> There's an inconsistency there. Sure.
Lee, what about the old odious debt
argument? this idea that if debt is
issued by I guess an odious regime or an
illegitimate regime of some sort then
maybe you don't have to pay it back at
all.
>> Yeah, this is a very sensitive area
Tracy. International law is very strict
in saying that governments
succeed to inherit the obligations of
their predecessors. No matter how
different in political philosophy one
administration may be from another. So
the boleviks take over from the zar in
1917. International law says the
boleviks have got to honor the debt.
Napoleon Bonapart honored the debts of
the bourbon monarchs that he followed.
The exception there are very limited
exceptions to that. One of them that was
first talked about in the early part of
the 20th century was odious debts. In
its original formulation, that meant a
debt incurred by a dictatorial regime
where the proceeds were not used for the
benefit of the citizenry of the debtor
country and where the creditor knew or
should have known
>> that the dictator was going to steal the
money. So, it was a pretty narrow
category. It was resurrected
in 2003 in the context of Saddam's Iraq
and there was a push there by among
others many in the George W. Bush
administration who wished to have
Saddam's debts disavowed on the basis
that they were odious.
My view at the time was that that was
ill- advised. That the doctrine of odius
debt is sufficiently gauzy
that it is not something that the
international community could have
endorsed because once you start down
that road there are a lot of sketchy
characters out there whose debt you
might want to disavow. So my view at
that time was that Iraq would be able to
achieve very significant debt relief
without unfurling the banner of odious
debt.
>> Can you explain a little bit more what
you see as the negative consequences of
this notion of odious debt? Because I
think a lot of people just maybe their
heartstrings they're like yes we should
start using this principle. Saddam bad
the lenders to him probably had a reason
to think he was a bad guy. What do you
see as the cost of introducing this
concept into sort of sovereign debt law
or norms?
>> Yeah, Joe, I entirely understand the
emotional argument. It strikes most
people as reprehensible.
>> Yeah.
>> That you could have a dictatorial
kleptomaniacal
regime that signs a contract on behalf
of the Republic of Roritania.
And when that son of a bachelor
>> exits the stage, the poor people of
Ruran, you've got to repay that debt.
That's the emotional argument. The other
side of it is what constitutes an odious
debt. You can have an odious regime
that borrows money to build a children's
cancer hospital. On the other hand, you
can have a democratically elected regime
that borrows money to finance a
terrorist organization.
What happened in the Iraq situation was
the Bush team really would have defined
it as any [clears throat] debt incurred
by an odious regime. Okay, even if you
take that, tell me what is an odious
regime? Is it one that makes war on its
neighbors?
Yes, probably. Is it one that is
insufficiently attuned to environmental
factors? Is it one that misprices women?
Tell me what's odious. And once you
start down that road, pretty hard to
find a regime that would to everyone's
satisfaction be regarded as virtuous.
[music]
>> [music]
>> talk a little bit more about the Iraq
restructuring because this seems to be
the previous sovereign debt
restructuring that people are drawing a
lot of parallels to uh with Venezuela.
So you have an oil producing country
operating as we've been discussing under
an authoritarian regime to put it mildly
>> an alleged narotist.
>> Yeah. Okay. Well, Saddam Hussein was
never a naroterrorist, was he?
>> I don't know. [laughter] He pro I don't
know. I don't
>> I don't remember. I was only like I was
like 11.
>> Naroterrorism is probably one of the few
sins that Saddam did not commit.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Okay. A point in his favor.
Talk about the parallels here. Can we
look at the Iraq sovereign debt
restructuring, which I think ended up
being something like 10 cents on the
dollar for creditors. Is that the
guiding light here? Would you expect
Venezuela to follow a similar path?
>> No. No. Iraq was unusual for this
reason. You remember that George W.
Bush, George II, put together a
coalition of 40some countries. Saddam
was ousted after a full invasion of the
country. So the country was run by the
coalition provisional authority largely
led by the United States but the Brits
were there and there were some others.
They really did run the country not in
the way Donald Trump says he runs
Venezuela at that point. The coalition
provisional authority really did run it.
The Bush team really wanted that
experiment to succeed. They wanted a
stable,
democratic
Iraq right in the middle of the Middle
East.
>> Someone that would support Israel when
that became necessary. They wanted a
bull work against Iran.
And they really wanted it to succeed.
And their perception at the time, this
is now 20034,
was that
this myasmic cloud of debt that Saddam
had accumulated and ceased paying, by
the way, in 1990 when the Security
Council put sanctions on him,
>> that debt stock would effectively keep
anyone from investing in Iraq, lending
it money, and so forth. So it was viewed
by the Bush people as a major obstacle
to the economic recovery of Iraq and and
so they issued the mandate deal with
that debt stock in the most expeditious
way possible. And as far as they were
more of Joe's view that they didn't like
Saddam Hussein and they didn't like
anyone who lent money to Saddam Hussein.
So they had little sympathy for the
creditors. The United States had a very
limited exposure. So this was a
relatively harmless position for the US
government to take. But their initial
proposal was to go and and say the debt
is odious. Let's write off 100% of it.
And we went to the Paris Club, the group
that negotiates governmental
intergovernmental debt, I think with a
proposal to write off 95% of it. In the
end, 80% of it was written off. And that
was absolutely [clears throat]
extraordinary
for a middle inome country that sits on
the fourth largest oil reserves in the
world. But that was the mindset of the
Bush people. I don't see Donald Trump
having any particular solicitude for the
citizens of Venezuela. His solicitude
seems to be for the oil companies and
perhaps for the US government itself.
>> That's interesting. I mean, who are we,
I suppose, to speculate into Donald
Trump's mind? Because on the other hand,
you know, it's like oil's at $57 a
barrel. Do the oil companies want to
spend tens of billions of dollars
rebuilding this? Do they want even
cheaper oil right now, which would
presumably happen if the taps turn on in
Venezuela? Unclear. Setting all that
aside, and maybe we'll get a little bit
more towards Donald Trump mind reading
in a moment. What do we know about the
holders of Venezuelan debt or pedesa
debt, are we able to tell what type of
institutions or entities are currently
holding it?
>> Joe, there's a function on the terminal
called HDS, which stands for holdings,
and you can look it up.
>> Okay. Well, but I'll leave it to leave.
>> Yeah, Lever is the terminal.
>> No, no. It's mostly traded into the
hands of hedge funds. Okay. In January
of 2019,
Mr. Bush in his first term imposed a
restriction that prevented US residents
from buying Venezuelan debt or even
selling it to themselves. They could
sell it overseas. And so some of it was
sold off. But as Tracy said in her
introductory remarks, in those days this
debt was trading 7 8 9 cents on the
dollar. But as with most sovereign debt
restructurings,
when the debt is in the form of bonds,
freely tradable bonds, you don't
actually know who owns it until such
time as you make an offer to restructure
it. Just real quickly as a followup,
does it matter? Okay, maybe people don't
have a lot of sympathy for hedge funds
that are picking up distress debt at two
cents or 5 cents on the dollar or maybe
people feel differently about some
entity that I don't know is man just
conservatively managing sovereign debt
for widows and orphans so to speak. But
from the perspective of international
law or New York law or sovereign debt
restructuring law, does the composition
of the creditor group bear into this at
all?
>> No. The claim is the claim.
>> Okay.
>> Where it is relevant, Joe, is in the
negotiation of the debt. If I sit across
from someone who paid 10 cents for their
claim, Yeah.
>> and I offer them 20 cents, I'm a hero.
But if I sit across from a in the old
days a banker
>> Yeah.
>> who lent a hundred cents and I offer him
20 cents. I'm a heel. And so it plays
into the negotiation in that sense.
>> Would you expect the US Treasury to be
heavily involved in these negotiations
just in terms of the actual process, the
legal process?
Not nearly as much as George Bush's
Treasury was back in 2004 and five. The
US Treasury has always had an interest
since 1982 when Mexico began the modern
era of sovereign debt workouts. US
Treasury has always had an interest in
seeing these problems dealt with in a
consensual negotiated way. So I would
expect if and when the time comes they
would encourage
both the Venezuelan administration and
the holders of Venezuela's debts to
negotiate them in a consensual way.
>> Well, actually, let me back up. I mean,
we're talking about these negotiations
and the market is clearly reflecting
some expectations of a change, but does
the arrest, the rendition of um Maduro
make that inevitable? Does this have to
happen or is it possible that again
because his vice president is currently
>> It's the same regime. It's the same
regime, which seems to be Trump seems to
be okay with because for whatever
reason, uh, we can only speculate what
kind of conversations they've had in the
background and so forth. But is there an
inevitability to these negotiations? Is
there a formal starting gun? Is there a
reason that they ever have to happen? Or
could Venezuela just stay on default and
sort of muddle through without any
resolution to the debt question? I don't
think they can stay in default
indefinitely, but there is no starting
gun. As a matter of fact, what has
prevented a restructuring of Venezuela's
debt since 2017 has been the sanctions
imposed by the US government.
>> Oh, yeah. This is funny. So, you can't
even sit down and begin to talk about a
restructuring because you'd be in
violation of of sanctions.
>> Yeah. And so, those sanctions would have
to be relaxed. And that decision
ultimately sits with Mr. Trump and he
may or may not decide that the removal
of Maduro is a sufficient basis on which
to begin relaxing sanctions, but I don't
think so. On the current path, he will
want to see a complacent regime in
Caracus. He has said as much. the
president of Venezuela has got to be
someone who follows the orders of Donald
John Trump. And he's he's said that if
they are sufficiently complacent, then
perhaps he will begin relaxing
sanctions, perhaps [clears throat]
allowing a debt restructuring to go
forward. What has changed and what will
be different this time is if you listen
to the president's speech last weekend,
he didn't talk about democracy. He made
a passing reference to wanting to see
Venezuela made great again. But his
principal focus was on the oil
companies. He wants them pumping oil and
to that end in effect said, "We will
make sure that your claims for
expropriation which occurred in the
Chavez era are getting paid." And if he
is true to what he said back
[clears throat] when George Bush was in
Iraq, Donald Trump criticized Bush for
not having taken Iraqi oil to pay for
the costs of the invasion.
And so I expect he will say this time
that Uncle Sam is entitled to be
recompensed for the cost of keeping that
naval armada in the Caribbean. So in a
restructuring
the waterfall which is normally a
squabble between the citizens of the
country and the creditors of the
country. In this case there may be
people at the top and maybe US
government is at the very top and oil
companies come next and then the
squabble [music] between citizens and
creditors.
>> [music]
[music]
>> One thing I've learned in my life and
job is that lawyers are nothing if not
creative. So, I'm wondering, is there
some sort of creative solution that
could at least help perhaps on the
margin the Venezuelan debt load while I
guess preserving the goodwill, so to
speak, of investors. So, I'm thinking,
you know, maybe maybe they get an
extension instead of a haircut. Or maybe
you have something like the Mexico
situation where you have new loans but
those fall under different treatment to
the older debt. Something like that.
>> Yeah. Look, a couple of things. First,
the oil infrastructure in this country
has been badly degraded. It's going to
take two to five years, I think, of
significant investment to bring that
infrastructure up to the point where
Venezuela is pumping what it was pumping
say back in 2016, maybe 3 million
barrels a day. So, this is not going to
happen overnight that there's a huge
influx of revenues. Second point, if Mr.
Trump is true to his word, first dibs on
those revenues will go to the oil
companies who are making these
investments.
Third, some money is going to have to be
used to have a discernable improvement
in the lives of Venezuelan citizens.
Otherwise, the regime that's in power
will be very fragile.
So, you're talking about years in which
most of this money is going to have to
go places other than into the pockets of
legacy bond holders. What I would expect
therefore is that the bond holders will
ask for what is generically called a
value recovery instrument. This is a
country that deres 95% of its foreign
currency earnings from the sale of a
commodity oil. So the logical thing
would be for the bond holders to say
give us an instrument that is a play on
the oil market.
>> That was done by the way in the early
90s during the so-called Brady
initiative. You had oil exporters,
Mexico, Venezuela, Nigeria,
and they sweetened their Brady
restructurings by giving oil warrants
that would pay off if oil exceeded a
certain strike price in the future.
Mexico's issued in 1990 had the strike
price set at the enormous level of $14 a
barrel, [laughter]
but I would expect that that will be the
fudge factor in a Venezuelan
restructuring. You're right that most
payments will have to be deferred for
quite a long time, but an oil instrument
is likely to be part of the mix.
>> When we're talking about international
law with respect to sovereign debt, what
law are we actually talking about?
Because I know often they talk about New
York law where a lot of bonds actually
get issued or they go through the banks
there, whatever. So when you talk about
okay international law says this that or
whatever about what corpus of law are we
actually talking about here and what law
is relevant to the Venezuelan debt.
>> Yeah. The debt instruments themselves
will be issued under the law of a
municipal jurisdiction. 95% of sovereign
emerging market sovereign debt is issued
under the law of either New York or
England.
>> Okay. In Venezuela's case, it's all New
York law.
>> Okay.
>> When I say international law, that's not
the law applicable to the contract.
That's really the law applicable to the
governments that form part of the
international okay
>> system. So it will be New York law in
the case of Venezuela. But just on this
note, I know there's been chatter for a
long time now about creating some sort
of common framework when it comes to
sovereign debt restructurings. Is that
at all realistic at this point in time
or is it still sort of pie in the sky
thinking? That idea was first broached
back at the time of the Argentine
default in December of 2001 and it was
actually promoted by the IMF. They
called it the sovereign debt
restructuring mechanism. They reasoned
as follows. In corporate debt workouts,
under bankruptcy, municipal bankruptcy
laws, if a super majority of the
creditors agree to a restructuring,
their decision binds any dissenting
minority.
>> Right?
>> Sovereigns are not subject to a
bankruptcy law. And so, sovereign debt
workouts have been characterized by
holdout creditors. that is creditors
that do not join a voluntary debt
restructuring and seek to pursue their
legal remedies. Argentina knows all
about this.
>> Yes, they do.
>> So, the IMF reasoned, well, what we need
is a chapter 11 for sovereigns. That
idea died a political death because the
Americans did not support it. But it
continues to have some vitality
and bills have been introduced over the
last few years into the New York
legislature.
One of them suggesting that perhaps New
York, whose law governs many of these
dead instruments, should itself put in
place a kind of chapter 11 process. It
hasn't gotten much traction. I don't
think that that will
>> why not?
>> Uh for a bunch of reasons. There are
aspects of sovereign debt workouts that
differ materially from corporate debt
workouts. Among other things, the court
does not control the foreign sovereign.
Cannot [laughter]
>> foreign sovereign. We're going to
liquidate you. We're going to take the
keys to Well, I mean, keys to Venezuela
kind of doing it.
>> Exactly. They can't say we're going to
replace the management. Sovereigns are
sovereign. And that has always been the
principal feature of sovereign debt
workouts is that you're dealing with
debtors who are not subject to any
institutionalized bankruptcy regime.
Therefore, we've had to rely on
consensual workouts. But I'm not going
to put too fine a point on the word
consensual.
Sometimes there's been encouragement.
>> All right, we we're going to have to
leave it there, but it's been so good to
catch up with you. Really the perfect
guest for this particular topic. So,
thank you so much.
>> Okay, guys. Thank you.
>> Thanks, Lee. That was fantastic.
>> So good. Thank you, Lee.
>> Byebye.
>> [music]
>> Joe, I really enjoyed that conversation.
Lee has an incredible talent for
explaining things in very very clear
language. But, you know, the thing that
stuck out to me is, I guess, the
contrast between sovereign versus
corporate debt.
>> Yeah.
>> You know, he talked about it at the end.
this idea that you can't really have a
sort of standardized bankruptcy process
for a sovereign as you do with a
corporate because sovereigns are
sovereign.
>> You can't have like a new equity. It's
like oh and now the and now the country
goes to the equity holders, right?
Because that's what happens in a
company, right? So it's like oh all the
you know what oh the debtors get a
haircut and there's a new they become
equity holders, right? the debtors be
what what would that even mean in the
sovereign concept for the debtors to
become equity holders except to some
extent to his point which I thought was
interesting was like okay you could have
an oil linked instrument but not every
country that gets into trouble is going
to have like a very easily salailable
commodity such as oil
>> yeah and also just I talked about this
in the intro but the idea of
>> debt is a human construct like it
doesn't actually exist except in our
minds And so
>> and on the pages of the terminal
>> and on the pages of the terminal of
course. So it can change over time and
there are all these values embedded in
it and one man's legitimate regime is
another man's or another investor's
dictatorship and it seems very hard to
litigate that in a public court.
>> Totally. How you define odius how do you
define an odious regime? How do you
define what are appropriate proceeds and
inappropriate proceeds? clearly
extremely difficult and of course sure
maybe the US government right now will
say Maduro narot terrorists etc but that
is just the perspective of the
department of justice which has uh which
has filed charges against Maduro
whatever whether that's some objective
reality difficult by the way I love that
episode
>> I would have rather not asked any
questions and just listen to Lee talk
for the [laughter] for the whole time
>> that's the perfect radio voice we're
going to get him to narrate something. I
think now that he's retired, he has some
time. He can narrate our next long form
episode.
>> Yeah, maybe we should do like a
three-part series on sovereign debt and
it just be
>> just have Lee tell stories about, you
know, being across the table from
various creditors.
>> I love that. Representing various failed
governments or postfailed governments or
unsavory car. Yes, that sounds great.
>> All right. Uh shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the Odd
Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Aloway
>> and I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our producers
Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen Arman Bennett
at D-bot and Kalebrooks at Kalebrooks.
For more OddLots content, go to
bloomberg.com/odlots
with a daily newsletter and all of our
episodes. And you can chat about all
these topics 24/7 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlots.
And if you enjoy OddLotss, [music] if
you want us to have Lee come back and
talk for three hours by himself, then
please leave us a positive review on
your favorite podcast platform. [music]
And remember, if you are a Bloomberg
subscriber, you can listen to all of our
episodes absolutely adree. All you need
to do is find the Bloomberg channel on
Apple Podcast and [music] follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
>> [music]
[music]